---
layout: post
title:  "On Hiring"
date:   2018-11-10
categories: hiring
---
I've spent most of my career looking for a job, or hiring software
engineers, or at least watching software engineers being
hired. As I had had yet another bout of exhausting job search, I spent
fair amount of time talking to everyone willing to listen about my
career path, my strengths and weaknesses, and, yes, about my opinions
on hiring and getting hired. I think it's a good time to write them
down, so the next time I can just point my interlocutors to this blog post.

Not that I have much to add to the discussion, just to express my
strongly held opinions and by doing so show my readers what kind of a
person I am. So, let me start with making a not very original
statement, and see if I can argue it well.

### Getting job is about finding a good fit.

Many years ago, when I first came to the US, I was young and new to
the adult professional life, not to mention having grown up behind the
iron curtain. I didn't know the rules of the game, but I was eager to
learn. I'd read books on writing a resume, and online how-tos on
interviewing. I dutifully put bulleted lists in my resume, and dressed
in a suit for interviews.

Back then, not knowing better, I thought about the entire process as a
goal-oriented activity. You write a resume to get an interview. You do
an interview to get the job. You dress your best, you talk your best,
you smile your best to get the damned job. If you get an offer, you
win the game. If you get rejected, you lose.

It took me many years to converge on deeper understanding. It is in
both parties' interest to hire the person who would last for many
years. This can only work if both parties are sufficiently happy with
the arrangement, if there is a good mutual fit.

Good fit: that's the only thing that really matters. Not bullet points
in the resume and smooth talking on the interview. Unless, that is,
you are specifically looking for people who are good at writing bullet
points and talking smoothly.

Now, I also need to mention that the price of a hiring mistake is very
high, again for both parties. Many people, myself included,
irrationally want to last for at least a year on a new job; and many
companies are reluctant to fire, concentrating instead on helping
employees who are struggling and writing performance improvement
plans. Here come months of interviewing and many more months, if not
years at a wrong job—wasted, lost from your life. I like pain and
suffering more than most other people, but even I would prefer to
suffer biking in freezing rain to showing up every morning for a job I
hate.

So here we have it: bad fit is bad, it's a waste of time at best, and
setting back both the employee and the employer at worst, not to
mention the copious amount of bad will and bad karma typically
generated in the process. Thus it is in both parties' best interest to
detect the wrong fit as early as possible during the
relationship. Detecting a wrong fit—and the rejection that typically
follows—is actually the best possible outcome under the circumstances.

Never feel bad about being rejected after an interview or losing a
candidate. Be happy that a bad fit was surfaced, and years of
unhappiness prevented. Being rejected by a wrong employer (or a wrong
candidate) helps you to concentrate on looking for the right job (or
the right candidate).

Be grateful for the early rejection.

### Getting job is like dating.

This is a very useful metaphor, and I like to keep it in mind. For
one, dating is also about finding the right match. Stable, happy
couples are rarely formed by looking for a skill checklist, or
targeting partners at specific income levels. Rather, you look for a
temperament complimentary to yours; for the life outlook and values
broadly aligned with yours; for somebody who would stand by you in
hard times.

Second, healthy relationship is about two people. Hiring is often
considered as an asymmetrical process; as an adversarial game where
the job seeker is trying to win over his interviewers. I certainly
thought so during my suit-wearing days. Employers reciprocate by
designing a brutal interviewing process and putting potential
employees in the position where they need to prove their worth. Job
seekers reciprocate back by fudging their resumes and misleading their
interviewers.

This is not healthy, and it equally hurts both parties. The only way to discover
mutual fit is to, well, work together on discovering it. The best
interviewing process is thus a two-way dialog, a mutual journey of
learning more about each other. Good interviewee asks his interviewers
a lot of question. Good interviewer encourages the interviewee to
interview him back—and allocates ample time for it.

It took me many years to realize all that, and it profoundly changed
the way I interview as a candidate. This days I never dress specially
for the interview, but rather come in my everyday outfit. If it is
jeans and a t-shirt, then jeans and t-shirt it is. And if they have a
problem with the way I dress, I would love to surface it right
away. Please, please reject me for the way I look, it means we won't
enjoy working together anyway, don't waste my time.

Likewise, even though I may smile more than usual, I would never
smooth-talk or sugarcoat things at the interview. Instead, I try hard
to be my authentic self, arrogant and abrasive at times, but
straightforward and brutally honest. If they don't like it, fine, I'd
rather find people who can appreciate me for who I really am. And of
course it goes for the technical skills as well. I would never pretend
to know something I don't. In fact, “I don't know” is my favorite
phrase. If my interviewer doesn't take it well, I want to find it out
right away!

And you know what? When I am on the other side of the table, I behave
exactly the same. I wear my daily clothes, and I am honest and
straightforward about the position, the team, the challenges that the
company faces. I am not trying to lure people to work with me. I want
to get those who would really enjoy that.

Just like dating.

### On Firing

Finally, I need to talk about the situation when the dating—that is,
the interviewing process—failed to detect a bad fit, the person got
hired, started at work, and then the badness of the fit became
painfully obvious.

If you are the employee, don't succumb to the sunk cost fallacy. Don't
try to “make it work” when it's obviously hopeless. Don't waste your
time, resign as soon as possible, find yourself a better place, be
happy there.

If you are the employer, consider this. Bad fit is
bad for both parties. If you let the employee go, both sides will
be able to find a better fit for themselves and thus will be better
off.

Importantly, letting go is not a judgment of the person. People
are rarely uniformly bad. We all have our strengths and
weaknesses. A bad fit is just that, a bad fit and nothing
more. Recognizing and rectifying it is judging the situation, not the
person. A bad fit is almost always mutual, and the person will be
better off elsewhere. Firing will help them, not hurt them.

That said, hiring a wrong employee is a failure of the hiring process,
your failure as an employer. It is your moral responsibility to own it
and to help the employee to the extent possible, be it with a generous
severance or with using your own network to help find them a better
job.

Admit your failures, own them, double down on surfacing bad fit early.

### It takes two to tango.

Summing up: looking for a job and hiring are two sides of the same
process, and it should be approached in the same way from both
sides. In a healthy relationship, both sides are looking for
a long-term, mutually advantageous arrangement.

Suits and bullet points are not required.
