---
layout: post
title:  On Treating People Well
date:   2018-12-11
categories: culture
excerpt: "What if we would treat our
         employees as human beings first, the way we treat our friends—with
         respect, dignity, and concern about their well-being—rather than as
         resources a manager would deploy to achieve a specific business goal?"
---

I recently interviewed at one of the many companies trying to improve
the US healthcare. Their office was in a historic building overlooking
the river with beautiful views, so I really didn't want to leave... but
I digress.

While I was there, an interviewer after an interviewer kept repeating
their mantra of “treating their customers (that is, patients) as if
they were their family”. What I think they meant by that was not to
invite the customers for a Thanksgiving dinner, but rather to make
treating them well and with dignity a guiding principle for all
business and technical decisions the company makes—above, say,
maximizing the profits and the market share.

What if we, running a company, apply a similar approach to our
employees? What if (as a thought experiment) we would treat our
employees as human beings first, the way we treat our friends—with
respect, dignity, and concern about their well-being—rather than as
resources a manager would deploy to achieve a specific business goal?
My friend Carty wrote about something similar that he calls
[Loving Organizations](https://medium.com/@cartyboston/building-a-loving-organization-f12b4310356c),
but I think he is mostly treating it as a moral imperative. I’d like
to take a slightly different tack here and explore treating people
well from a more pragmatic standpoint. Is it a viable approach to
building a company?  Does it make business sense?

*

It is true that many companies—many start-ups—start kind of, sort of
like that. You come to an interview, and you hear how well people are
treated here. Like a family! At some point, a foosball table makes an
appearance, or maybe even free beer. Life is good in the ’hood.

But then at some later point in time the investors’ money starts
running out, and “the management” comes under stronger and stronger
pressure _to do something_. It’s at that point where even originally
well-intentioned companies often start breaking down culturally. The
employees see fewer hard numbers at the all-hands presentations, more
closed-door meetings they are not invited to, and then some of them
are shown to the door.

They are quite surprised. What happened to being treated as a family
and all that free beer? Well, maybe down the road, when it happens to
them again and again, they will stop being surprised and will start
seeing the free beer for what it really is.

The layoffs themselves may have nothing to do with how people are
treated: after all, if the company can’t afford to pay its employees,
something has to give. It is how the people are treated during this
stressful time, how they are held in the dark, how they are treated as
mere pieces on the board: all of that really uncovers what the company
is about.

The moral of this story, which many of us saw unfolding around us, is
not that some particular companies are evil, or turn evil, but rather
that treating people well is hard, and it is something that is easy to
lose under pressure.

*

To me, it was a discovery of sorts. Many (all?) of us think about
ourselves as decent people, but decency in a business setting somehow
doesn't just happen on its own. It takes constant, deliberate effort
to maintain it, and a deliberate, conscious decision to always
prioritize it higher than other business objectives.

And then, it is suddenly not hard anymore! In the software business,
we know very well how to deal with prioritized lists of tasks and
requirements. If treating our people well is on top of the list, then
we will do that first. If my boss explicitly expects it from me, I
internalize it as a part of my job, and will make sure to do it.

That was one of the lessons that the founder and CEO of my last
company taught me. Don't take treating people well and respectfully for
granted. Make it an explicit goal. Tirelessly keep reminding ourselves
that this is our highest priority.

And by _ourselves_ I mean the management. As much as I would prefer
the relationship between employees and their managers to be
symmetrical, the reality tends to be different. Power, real or
perceived, tends to flow one way; and regardless, it is the specific
responsibility of managers and leaders to care about their people.

Now, as a cynical Russian émigré, I am always very suspicious of
constantly telling the people themselves how well they are
treated. Stop proclaiming that you are building—or that you have
built—the best company in the world to work at. If this is somehow
true, your employees will surely figure it out on their own, and will
really appreciate that, and will tell their friends all about it; and
if this is not true, constantly repeating hollow slogans will only
make people to treat everything else you say as hollow. (They will
certainly tell their friends about _that_, too.)

For the leadership themselves, though, it does make sense to
constantly remind of their leading principles. And if it is treating
people well above increasing the shareholders' value, then there is a
chance of building a different company.

*

What does it actually mean to treat people well? To me, it is thinking
about your people they way you would think about your friends in a
social setting. Always being open and honest; not having hidden
agendas; caring about the other's well-being, present and future;
being ready to overlook their small drawbacks; tactfully helping them
to improve.

Being open and honest is probably the simplest (but not necessarily
easy!) thing to do, and the one that goes really long way. By not
holding anything back, you treat people as adults who are capable of
making their own conclusions based on the full information.

This is, by the way, where I would expect some reciprocity from my
employees. As I, for example, commit to give them the earliest
possible warning about coming layoffs, I would equally appreciate if
they give me the earliest possible notice of them potentially leaving
the company.

Even having such a conversation is only possible in the environment of
mutual trust and respect. It is much more typical for an employee to
keep mum about looking for a new job out of fear that if the boss
finds out they would be fired right away. Likewise, the executive
would keep upcoming layoffs under wraps not to effect employee morale.

We want to build something different: an environment where people are
not afraid to share their problems and concerns. This is a concrete
example when it is actually good for the business. I value my
employees and don't want to lose them. If they are not hesitant to
communicate to me their discontent, it gives me a chance to make
things right before it's too late.

And if there is nothing I can do to stop them leaving, I will happily
use my own network to help them find a new, better fitting job for
themselves—the way my own bosses had done for me in the past. I want
my employees to know that I will always help them to the extent
possible, and will always prioritize their interest. Creating such
culture is exactly what allows them to initiate difficult
conversations with me, expecting help rather than fearing retribution.

*

Being open and treating people well starts with the hiring
process. Indeed, as we established in the previous posts, hiring done
right is the chance for both parties to get to know each other and to
evaluate the mutual fit. To that end, I would always do my best to be
brutally honest with a candidate, not to become carried away by the
“hiring is selling” paradigm.

In fact, I came up with something I call a negativity session. When I
am ready to make an offer, and I verbally established with the
candidate that he or she is ready to accept, I would invite them for
one last meeting, where I would spend an hour trying to convince them
_not_ to join my company. I would talk in depth of all problems, of
all risks and uncertainties, of everything I personally don't like
about my company. If they are still excited to join us after being
through that—well, first, my conscience is clear that I never misled
them; and second, we have established the relationship of trust from
the get-go.

*

Sometimes, treating people well comes with a price tag. If you have to
lay off a loyal employee, she might deserve a generous severance
package. You pay it because it is the right thing to do, even though
it might affect your runway.

But more often than not, doing the right thing is delightfully
free. Coming back to transparency: how many companies boast of being
fully transparent with the employees, and show them some financial
slides at the monthly all-hands meetings? And then somehow the slides
fail to appear? We solved this problem in a different way: just shared
the live copy of our financial model spreadsheet with the entire
company. Anyone could open it at any time, and see for themselves when
exactly we would run out of money. It cost us nothing to do, and from
what I heard the employees really appreciated that. I know I did.

Transparency is a complex subject, and there are many ways to approach
it, ours being one of them. In the context of my argument,
transparency is not necessarily a goal in itself, but rather the means
to achieve a more important goal: honesty.

*

What are the practical benefits of such people-oriented environment?
For one, better employee satisfaction and better retention: the
company wins.

I talked above about picking the right leadership principles for you
organization, for example prioritizing treating people well above
increasing the shareholders' value. In fact, I believe that is a false
dichotomy. We build successful organizations by attracting good people
and creating the right environment for them to perform well. This is
exactly what the shareholders will appreciate in the long run.

There are also benefits to you personally as a leader. I do
fundamentally believe in karma; but if we want to stay more practical,
let's call it reputation. If you go out of your way to treat people
with respect, they will notice. (If you don't, rest assure they will
notice it too!) As your reputation grows, people who care about being
treating well will come to you, and happily work with you, and bring
their friends.

It is, obviously, completely unrealistic to expect every single
company to prioritize employees over revenue, or every single manager
to care deeply about his or her karma. Some companies are just
genuinely not interested in a human aspect of the business. Some lose
their commitment somewhere along the way. In particular, as a company
grows and has to scale hiring and make the org chart more complex,
there is often pressure for more formal, more transactional processes,
where employees deliver certain value for the company, get compensated
for that value, and there is nothing else to the employee/employer
interaction.

Imagine then a world where these two trends run long enough to reach a
stable state. In this world, people who want to be treated with
respect and compassion would go work for companies that prioritize
treating employees well—based on the reputation of the companies and
their leaders. And people who prefer a more transactional style would
go work for more transactional companies. (Those companies would still
have to compete for good employees, and might deploy foosball tables
and free beer in order to attract them, but nobody will get confused
about what it really means.)

Wouldn't that be a great world for everyone?

And is that world really so different from ours?

Just keep working on your karma.
