---
layout: post
title:  On Good Fit
date:   2018-11-15
categories: hiring
excerpt: "I realize that all this talk about looking for the right fit may sound
   naive, or irrelevant, or not applicable to large companies. It does
   come from my experience on small teams (from both sides of the table),
   and my sincere quest to build teams that are productive, respectful
   and maybe even somewhat happy (again, from both sides of the table)."
---
I've received a lot of support and encouragement on my piece
[on hiring]({% post_url 2018-11-10-on-hiring %})—much more than I
expected! Thank you; it helps a lot; I will be writing more.

I realize that all this talk about looking for the right fit may sound
naive, or irrelevant, or not applicable to large companies. It does
come from my experience on small teams (from both sides of the table),
and my sincere quest to build teams that are productive, respectful
and maybe even somewhat happy (again, from both sides of the table).

One could argue that this approach can't possibly apply to industrial
programming, where hundreds of people sit in unending rows of cubicles
and produce some Java code according to a carefully written spec. I
would then argue back that in this case the right fit is of
*paramount* importance! I know quite a few people who would promptly
go bananas if forced into this setting. Employees going bananas is
generally bad both for them and for their employer; it is yet another
reminder that the right fit is equally important for both parties.

There is really nothing special about the right fit. The company is
looking for specific technical skills (knows Java) and certain
“cultural values” (likes sitting in a cubicle doing what he is
told). And if it is important for you to exercise your knowledge of
Java, sit in a cubicle all day, and implement the spec, then this is
the kind of a company you should be looking for. When you find each
other, it is love from first sight. You know you were meant for each
other. You will make each other happy. That is all there is to it.

Looking for the right fit is not a pipe dream; it's just common
sense. My only message to employees and employers is to be mindful
that this mythical beast—the right fit—is what we are actually looking
for, and to build the approaches and the processes that try to uncover
it explicitly and forcefully. It is not necessarily something that
fits cleanly into a standard resume; and most definitely not something
that fits into a hiring page designed by PR people and lawyers. I went
through quite a few, looking for an inspiration when I was hiring at
my last place. As a job seeker, I don't want to read that you “work
hard and play hard”. I *know* that it doesn't mean anything; all I
hear is that you either can't articulate what is actually happening on
your team, or gave up control to professional copywriters.

To me, the right approach is to do some deep introspection, to figure
out what is really important to you (as a person or as a company), and
also what sets you apart from the others. It could be technical things
or “cultural”; in practice, almost certainly a mix of the two. After
you figure it out, first, explicitly look for it; second, communicate
clearly and proactively; third, use it to drive whatever written
materials you create: resumes, cover letters, company's hiring pages.

It was important for me to build a team with a straight-shooting,
no-bullshit culture. That was the kind of people I wanted to attract
and to work with, so I just put it in the website copy that the team
had a “No-bullshit policy”. (Sadly, my CEO used his veto power and
struck that particular line down; this is how my cherished no-bullshit
policy developed a small crack.)

The fundamental problem with all this fit business is that it is often
tricky to assess quickly, particularly during a 45-minute interview
with somebody you've never seen before. Learning about people requires
time, effort, and building meaningful relationships. This is exactly
the dating analogy I talked about elsewhere. In my book, a 45-minute
interview falls short of dating.

Fit assessment is also hard to do against a hard deadline, or in a competitive
situation. For example, I am just emerging from an intensive 2+ months
job search. I managed to get offers from six great companies, and I
do feel that both I and them were somewhat short-changed by my
inability to focus on one great company at a time. It is like dating
six nice girls at once with an explicit intent to compare, contrast,
and choose just one of them. I know I am quite old-fashioned, but this
doesn't feel quite right to me.

Given that we need to look for the right fit deliberately, with no
deadlines and no aggressive competitors, there is only one logical
solution, and it sounds quite counter-intuitive.

The best time to look for a job is when you are happily employed (and
thus are under no great pressure to make a move quickly). The best
potential hires are the ones that are employed now. And the best time
to start courting them is a few months before you actually and
desperately need them.

Looking for the right fit is clearly a lot of work on both sides! Why
do we bother? Pragmatically, well placed and well motivated employees
are more productive and stay with the company much longer.

And on the personal level, we all spend a fair amount of our life at
work. Wouldn't it be nice to spend it being more fulfilled, going with
the grain and not against it,—perhaps even somewhat happier? If that
is not worth the extra effort, I am not sure what is.
