---
layout: post
title:  Go For A Walk
date:   2019-01-27
categories: culture
---

I always liked going for a walk. It helps me think; it helps me clear
my head; and, growing up as nerdy, unathletic boy, it used to be my
main way to get some physical activity.

Working for many years in software companies, however, it never
occurred to me to incorporate walking into my professional life. In
particular, walking with my coworkers—somehow it did not feel socially
acceptable.

I think it was Puneet who first introduced me to the idea of walking
meetings, even before I started working at his company. When he would
need to discuss something which was hard, or called for on open,
honest conversation, he would just invite me to step outside. I would
happily oblige. It worked really well for me.

So it kind of came without saying that, when we started working
together again, we would go for a walk to discuss things. When I hired
people, that's how we conducted our one-on-one meetings.

I think that one-on-ones are a very important tool in a manager's
arsenal (more on that in later posts), but to be effective they
require setting up an open, trusting conversation. This is exactly
where walking helps.

There are well known advantages of walking. Obviously, in our line of
work, when we spend our waking time glued to computer monitors, any
physical activity is beneficial. Walking was long established to boost
creativity.

But beyond that, an effective one-on-one requires opening up. Using a
conference room will make it just yet another meeting. Forcing both of
you outdoors and away from the office completely changes the context;
it even changes the power dynamics. A manager's power over his or her
reports is limited to the office. Outside, you are just two people
walking down the street. _Now_ there is some hope for an honest,
direct conversation.

As I've kept doing my one-on-ones while walking, I somehow believed
that it was our invention, our little secret. When I joined my new
company, I was quite happy to discover that they also have been doing
their one-on-ones while walking as long as they could remember!  And
not just them: turns out that even Steve Jobs
[preferred walking meetings](http://fortune.com/2011/11/15/silicon-valleys-different-kind-of-power-walk/).

Of course to really enjoy a walk, you need to go walking in a
nice-looking place. If it is separated from cars, even better. It's
probably not a coincidence that my two last jobs both had offices
close to beautiful bike paths. (Something to keep in mind next time
you are looking for a job, or for office space.)

I still think that most meetings are not suitable for walking—when
there are more than two or three people, for example, or when you need
a white board. But some meetings, like one-on-ones and strategy
brainstorms, seem to be a particularly good fit.

Even more broadly, my lesson learned is to never assume that something
is not socially acceptable just because people around me are not doing
it that way.

Good ideas are worth trying.

Go for a walk.
