---
layout: post
title:  On Treating People Well
date:   2018-12-12
categories: work
---

I recently interviwed at one of the many companies trying to improve
the US healthcare. Their office was in a historic building overlooking
the river with beatiful views, so I really didn't want to leave... but
I digress.

While I was there, an interviewer after an interviewer kept repeating
their mantra of “treating their customers (that is, patients) as if
they were their family”. What I think they meant by that was not to
invite the customers for a Thanksgiving dinner, but rather to make
treating them well and with dignity a guiding principle for all
business and technical decisions the company makes—above, say,
maximizing the profits and the market share.

What if we, running a company, apply a similar approach to our
employees? What if, as a thought experiment, we would treat our
employees as human beings first, the way we treat our friends—with
respect, dignity, and concern about their well-being—rather than as
resources a manager would deploy to achieve a specific business goal?
My dear friend Carty wrote about something similar that he calls
[Loving
Organizations](https://medium.com/@cartyboston/building-a-loving-organization-f12b4310356c),
but I think he is mostly treating it as a moral imperative. I’d like
to take a different tack and explore treating people well from a more
pragmatic standpoint. Is it a viable approach to building a company?
Does it make a business sense?

And it is true that many companies—many start-ups—start kind of, sort
of like that. You come to an interview, and you will hear how well
people are treated here. Like a family! At some point, a Foosball
table makes an appearance, or maybe even free beer. Life is good in
the ’hood.

But then at some point the investors’ money starts running out, and
“the management” comes under stronger and stronger pressure _to do
something_. It’s at this point where even originally well-intentional
companies often start breaking down culturally. The employees see
fewer numbers at the all-hands meetings, more closed-door meetings
they are not invited too, and then some of them are shown at the
door. They are quite surprised. What happened to being treated as a
family and all that free beer? Well, maybe down the road, when it
happens to them again and again, they will stop being surprised and
will start seeing the free beer for what it really is.

The moral of this story, which many of us saw unfolding around us, is
not that some particular companies are evil, or turn evil, but rather
that treating well is hard, and it is easy to lose it under
pressure.

To me, it was a discovery of sorts. Many (all?) of us think about
ourselves as decent people, but decency in a business setting somehow
doesn't just happen on its own. It takes constant, deliberate effort
to maintain it, and a deliberate, conscious decision to always
prioritize it higher than other business objectives.

And then, it is suddenly not hard anymore! In the software business,
we know very well how to deal with prioritized lists of tasks and
requirements. If treating our people well id on top of the list, then
we will do that first.

That was one of the lessons that the founder and CEO of my last
company taught me. Don't take treating people well and respectfully for
granted. Make it an explicit goal. Tirelessly keep reminding ourselves
that this is our highest priority.

And by _ourselves_ I mean the management. As much as I would prefer
the relationship between employees and their managers to be
symmetrical, the reality tends to be different. Power, real or
perceived, tends to flow one way; and regardless, it is the specific
responsibility of managers and leaders to care about their people.

Now, as a cynical Russian émigré, I am always very suspicious of
constantly telling the people themselves how well they are
treated. Stop proclaiming that you are building—or have built—the best
company to work at. If this is somehow true, your employees will
surely figure it out on their own, and really appreciate it; and if
this is not true, constantly repeating hollow slogans will only make
people to treat everything else you say as hollow.

But for the leadership themselves, it does make sense to constantly
remind of their leading principles. And if it is treating people well
above increasing the shareholders' value, then there is a chance of
building a different company.

What does it actually mean to treat people well? To me, it is thinking
about your people they way you would think about your friends in a
social setting. Always being open and honest; not having hidden
agendas; caring about the other's well-being, present and future;
being ready to overlook their small drawbacks; tactfully helping them
to improve.

Being open and honest is probably the simplest (but not necessarily
easy!) thing to do, and the one that goes really long way. By not
holding anything back, you treat people as adults who are capable of
making their own conclusions based on the full information. This is
where I would expect reciprocity from the employees. As I, for
example, commit to give them the earliest possible warning about
coming layoffs, I would equally appreciate if they give me the
earliest possible notice of them potentially leaving the company.

Note that such a conversation is only possible in the environment of
mutual trust and respect. It is much more typical for an employee to
keep mum about looking for a new job out of fear that if the boss
finds out they would be fired right away. Likewise, the executive
would keep upcoming layoffs under wraps not to effect employee morale.

We, following our thought experiment, want to build something
different: an environment where people are not afraid to share their
problems and concerns. This is a good example when it is actually
good for business. I value my employees and don't want to lose
them. If they are not hesitant to communicate to me their discontent,
it gives me a chance to make things right before it's too late.

Being open and treating people well starts with the hiring
process. Indeed, as we established in the previous posts, hiring done
right is the chance for both parties to get to know each other and to
evaluate the mutual fit. To that end, I would always do my best to be
brutally honest with a candidate, not to become carried away by the
“hiring is selling” paradigm. In fact, I came up with something I call
a negativity session. When I am ready to make an offer, and I verbally
established with the candidate that he or she is ready to accept, I
would invite them for one last meeting, where I would spend an hour
trying to convince them _not_ to join my company. I would talk in
depth of all problems, of all risks and uncertainties, of everything I
personally don't like about my company. If they are still excited to
join my after being through that—well, first, my conscience is clear
that I never misled them; and second, we have established the
relationship of trust from the get-go.

Honesty and transparency naturally extends to avoid office politics:
all kinds of hidden agendas and manipulating people. Say, Alice and
Bob are considered for a promotion


Fundamentally, what we are talking about here

What are the practical benefits of such people-oriented environment?
For one, better employee satisfaction and better retention: the
company wins. There also benefits to you personally as a leader. I do
fundamentally believe in karma; but if we want to stay more practical,
let's call it reputation. If you go out of your way to treat people
with respect, they will notice. (If you don't, rest assure they will
notice it too!) As your reputation grows, people who care about being
treating well will come to you and happily work with you.

It is, obviously, completely unrealistic to expect every single
company to prioritize employees over revenue, or every single manager
to care deeply about his or her karma. In particular, as a company
grows and has to scale hiring and make the org chart more complex,
there is often pressure for more formal, more transactional processes,
where employees deliver certain value for the company, get compensated
for that value, and there is nothing else to the employee/employer interaction.

Imagine then a world where these two trends run long enough to reach a
stable state. In this world, people who want to be treated with
respect and compassion would go work for companies that prioritize
treating employees well—based on the reputation of the companies and
their leaders. And people who prefer a more transactional style would
go work for more transactional companies. (Those companies would still
have to compete for good employees, and might deploy foosball tables
and free beer in order to attract them, but nobody will get confused
about what it really means.)

Wouldn't that be a great world for everyone?

And how different is that world from ours?

Just keep working on your karma.

---

<small>And that healthcare company that strove to treat customers as
family? The day after the interview I got a call from their internal
recruiter. Apparently, everybody I talked to liked me technically, but
they were concerned about my personal style fitting their culture. I
was rejected.

<small>I didn't expect that, but I thanked her sincerely. I am always
happy to see companies that care about the right fit, and are vigilant
to preserve their culture as they grow.</small>
